---
id: 131
title: Lessons from 1950's
date: 2020-12-21T12:03:12+00:00
guid: https://www.serenadewind.com/posts/1950-lessons/
permalink: /posts/1950-lessons/
author: sw
layout: post
categories:
    - Relationships
    - Sailing Adventures
tags:
    - leanintovalues
    - cultureofcharacter
    - unstructured
share: true
image:
    thumbnail: /images/small/dhn-rudder-mags-landscape.jpg 
excerpt: I have a chance to catch up on some reading, including the April 1950 printing of The Rudder.
---
{% include toc %}

{% assign pwimg="dhn-rudder-mags-landscape" %}
{% assign pwcaption="Gifts from Captain Rich" %}
{% assign pwpng="" %}
{% include post-wide-image.html%}

# The 50's 

When we first moved aboard, captain Rich handed us a stack of old sailing magazines, one of which I profiled in the story [History Buffs](/posts/history-buffs/). Now that we're on passage, we have a little time on our hands so I'm able to peruse these gifts at leisure. 

The oldest issue in this collection is "The Rudder" from April 1950. I wasn't even a glint in my mother's eye as this was over 70 years ago! 

Let's put this into [perspective](https://www.stardem.com/top-inventions-of-the-s/article_b5b37c70-1975-56fb-9865-f5eb4d5acbef.html). 

 - In 1950, the first credit card was invented. 
 - In 1951, Super glue, power steering and the first video tape recorder came into our lives.
 - The first diet soft drink was sold in 1952.
 - In 1954, Ray Krock started McDonalds Restaurants; the first nonstick Teflon pan was produced; and "the pill" oral contraceptive was invented as well as the solar cell.
 - During 1956 to 1959, the first computer hard disk was used; Fortran computer language was invented as well as the computer modem and microchip.

All of these inventions and firsts serve us well even today. Ironically, while the [post World War II era](https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-2006-04-09-0604090253-story.html) of the 1950's is widely regarded as the golden age of prosperity, life wasn't necessarily better. 

People however were happier because they were living a much better life than they were during the war or between wars. With the advent of credit cards came the mechanism for people to overspend and keep up with the Joneses. Fast forward to today, and people are overextended. We cater to the impulse to consume, and we get ourselves into trouble. 

Andrew and I took deliberate steps earlier this year to jump off this treadmill and reevaluate our [relationship with money](/posts/relationship-with-money/). Slowly we have come to live more thoughtfully and fully.

What other lessons can be gleaned from the past? 

{% assign pwimg="dhn-rudder-self-reliance" %}
{% assign pwcaption="" %}
{% assign pwpng="" %}
{% include post-wide-image.html%}

# Self Reliance

The day after we had the compressor working on our boat, Andrew had nightmares about the frost and ice accumulation on the lines. All that moisture can't be good for the surrounding wood surfaces and so the following day, he shut off the refrigeration system and began to insulate all the copper lines with refrigerant. 

> Luck favors the prepared.

Bill had stocked up the boat with plenty of spares, supplies and tools. We laugh sometimes that we are a floating franchise of [West Marine](https://www.westmarine.com/) however in times like these, we see the value of that preparation. Andrew dug around one of the sections of the settee and pulled out a 3' length of [Frost King](https://www.frostking.com/) tubular foam insulation. 

So when I read the editorial written by Boris Lauer-Leonardi, I saw the symmetry in the lesson of self reliance.

> Self reliance is in our opinion one of the most admirable characteristics by man... The Man who relies upon himself is the one who owes nothing to anybody, is never under obligation, and treads upon this earth proudly and without fetters.
> 
> Self reliance is ingrained in the true seaman. Boats teach that if nothing else. A man with a boat must learn to depend upon himself only, or leave the water. No matter how small the boat, how near the land, something will come up to tax his ingenuity, even if only to the extent of lifting out the floorboards to paddle in because the oars have drifted away. 

{% assign pwimg="dhn-rudder-cape-may" %}
{% assign pwcaption="" %}
{% assign pwpng="" %}
{% include post-wide-image.html%}

# Just a Good Sail

The article "Bound North from Cape May" by Adam Morrison describes the story of a fleet of 3 small boats who left for Cape May Harbor and arrived in New York with no casualties or heroics. It was just a good sail. With leading comments such as *"Never go in nowhere at night," I told myself as I thought it over, but of course the very next night I disregarded my own dictum*, I knew there a setup for an interesting tale. 

Some other comments from the helm include:

 - If there's any sediment in the gas tank, this is where it will act up (near Atlantic City)
 - Shackles to replace all hooks (sitting on the wet foredeck wrestling with the crazy jib)
 - I lunched on two candy bars and a box of crackers with a quick drink of water. That was all I was to have until the next morning (when hunger reminded him he failed to make sandwiches in the shelter of the harbor) 
 - It was better to burn gas now than have to buy sails later (when the sky turned a menacing black)
 - Almost as if it were filmed in slow motion, I saw the *Blue Lagoon* mainsail tear from leach to luff. The gaff swung back and forth with nothing to restrain it. 
 - I looked out to see how the anchor was holding and was disgusted to note that it was not (when they arrived in New York Habor, but refused to go further under a bridge that looked too close to the water for his mainmast)
 - Picking the lee side of an army dock with a posted "Keep Off" sign, I tied up. The sea was surging through the open pilings, and now an outgoing tide was pressing me tight against them. The groaning and grinding were very unpleasant, so after putting out all available chafing gear, I lay down to think it over. I could say "to hell with it" and go to sleep, knowing that I would wake to see a scarred hull and maybe a big repair bill. I could go around to the other side of the pier where the tide would hold me off until it changed, and then I would have to come back to this side. Rather than that, I wearily pulled on my boots and resigned myself to a night of tending fenders.

So my takeaway from these comments are to:

 1. clean the fuel holding tank before any significant passage
 2. check all the shackles on your running rigging; evaluate the blocks and cars too while you're at it.
 3. make sure to have passage-friendly, real food prepared in advance
 4. watch for sudden changes in the weather and sail conservatively
 5. approach a new destination during daylight hours
 6. don't get rid of any of the chafing gear on board even if it takes up a lot of space

{% assign pwimg="dhn-rudder-wooden-bilge-pumps" %}
{% assign pwcaption="" %}
{% assign pwpng="" %}
{% include post-wide-image.html%}

# Wooden Bilge Pumps

Finally, I read the charming account of Hervey Garret Smith who after a couple days of torrential rains (much as what we had been experencing in Florida) awoke to find his rowboat half full of rainwater. I recited the first few paragraphs, ending with the phrase "Silver Threads among the Gold." 

Andrew cracked a smile. 

We are both blessed with youthful looks and when the appearance of grey hair occurred to him over the summer, Andrew had shared his delight with my mom who quoted lines from "Silver Threads among the Gold." We had no idea what she was referring to until we found [the song](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silver_Threads_Among_the_Gold) on Youtube. This song was first copyrighted in 1873, popularized in the 19th and 20th centuries and is a standard among barbershop quartets. 

Back to the point of the article, the wooden bilge pump raised an enormous stream of water and did so quietly. I was reminded by our first encounter with a bilge pump after we moved onto the boat. Within a few days, we knew we had to clean the bilge. It took a little trial and error to effectively use our Thirsty Mate contraption, which was modern and quiet. 

Given the age of our boat, I wouldn't be surprised to see a wooden bilge pump stowed somewhere in the aft cabin. At least, I will now know what it is.
